---
title: "Time to intervene: A continuous-time approach to network analysis and centrality "
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2021-07-02-EAM1
venue: "9th European Congress of Methodology (EAM)"
date: 2021-07-02
location: "Valencia, Spain"
---

Dynamical network analysis of experience sampling data has become increasingly popular in psychology. In this approach, discrete-time vector autoregressive (DT-VAR) model parameters are interpreted as direct relationships between psychological processes, and centrality measures are used to identify which variable should be targeted for an intervention. However, VAR models suffer from time-interval dependency, which has both practical and conceptual implications for applied researchers. On the practical side, these models are typically unable to deal with unequally spaced measurements typical of ESM data, while a uniform time-interval poses the risk that substantive conclusions may not generalize to other time-intervals. Continuous Time (CT) models have been suggested as an alternative in the panel data and time series literature, but these models
require a conceptual shift: amongst other considerations, the CT perspective implies that DT-VAR parameters in the best-case scenario reflect total rather than direct relationships. As a consequence, CT models are likely to have profound consequences for the use of centrality measures and other common practices in the network approach.

In this paper we propose and illustrate a CT approach to network analysis. We make use of CT-VAR models for this purpose, the integral solution of the first-order stochastic differential equation. We define a new network representation based on differential equation parameters, and develop new CT centrality measures for aiding the choice of intervention targets in this new approach variables should be targeted for interventions, and what kinds of interventions can be expected to lead to what kinds of outcome.

We illustrate this new methodology with the aid of an empirical example based on an open-source single-subject experience-sampling dataset, showing that the CT network approach yields novel insights in comparison to current DT approaches.

We close with a discussion on the potential advantages and disadvantages of the CT approach in a network setting, and the possibility for alternative approaches which focus on modelling dynamic systems with more general differential equation models. 

[Slides Here](http://ryanoisin.github.io/files/ctnetworks_oisinryan_EAM21.pdf)
